# Lecture 6

## Physical Security

* The physical protection of assets
* Assets may be tangible / intangible in nature
* Protection against:
  * Theft
  * Destruction
  * Damage
  * Interference

## Threats

* Emergencies
  * Fire and smoke
  * Building/structure damage
  * Loss of power
  * Water damage
  * Toxic materials
* Natural Disaster
  * Earth movement
  * Storm Damage
* Human Factor
  * Sabotage
  * Vandalism
  * War
  * Strikes

### The Big 7

* Temperature
  * Extreme variations
* Gasses
  * Military gas, commercial vapours, humidity, suspended particles.
* Liquids
  * Water and chemicals. Floods, cleaning fluids.
* Organisms
  * Viruses, bacteria, people, insects, animals
* Projectiles
  * Tangible objects in motion, and powered objects
* Movement
  * Collapse, sheering, shaking, vibration, liquefaction.
  * "If you shake something enough at the right frequency it will liquify"
* Energy anomalies
  * Surges or failures, static, noise, radiation


* Why we care about suspended particles?
  * Suspended particles such as flour dust are extremely flamable
  * Use copper fastenings to never have sparks.

## Facilities Planning

### Site Selection

* Visibility
  * What neighbours?
  * High enough security?
* Local Considerations
  * Crime rate?
  * Possible nearby hazards
* Natural Disasters
  * Likelihood of disaster?
* Transportation
  * Staff access
  * Excessive traffic
* Joint Tenancy
  * What are the terms, who has access to core services?
* External Services
  * Proximity of local emergency services

### Site Design

We're more likely to be involved in this than Site Selection

* Walls
  * What is their construction
  * What is the fire rating?
* Ceilings
  * Weight bearing and fire rating
* Floors
  * Slab -> Weight rating, fire rating
  * Raised -> Fire rating, electostatics
* Windows
  * Should they be here?
  * Should filter light and be shatterproof/armoured
  * Burglar bars
* Doors
  * Resistance to forcible entry
  * Fire rating >= Walls
  * Safe state locks -> People **ALWAYS** take priority
* Sprinkler systems
  * Location and type should be suitable
* HVAC
  * Dedicated emergency power
  * Emergency shutoff
  * Positive air pressure
* Electrical
  * Backup power
  * Clean power
  * Secure operation and access

### Audit Trails

* Like a computer system, physical location need audit trails
  * Date and time of access attempt
  * Was it successful?
  * Where was the access attempted
  * Who attempted access
  * who modified priviledges
* More of a detective measure than preventative.

### Emergency Procedures

* Emergency plans need to be planned ahead of time and all staff trained in their execution
  * Emergency system shutdown procedures
  * Site Evacuation
  * Employee training and protection

### Personnel Controls

* Commonly implemented by HR Dept.
* Pre-employment screening
  * Employment history, education, references.
  * Background and credit ratings where needed.
* On-going employee checks
  * Security clearances should be reviewed
  * Continuous employee rating/review
* Post-employment procedures
  * Exit Interviews
  * Return of organisation inventory
  * Removal of systems and physical access


* Reducing risk employees and company by employing people who are not succesptible to external influence.
  * Drug dealers
  * Gambling bookies
  * Debt
* None of the above are IT functions; however it still involves IT (revoking access control etc.)

### Environmental & Life Safety Controls

* These controls are required to function correctly in order to sustain either the computer system's operating environment, or the personnel's environment
  * Electrical Power
  * Fire Detection & Suppression
  * Heating Ventilation and Air-conditioning (HVAC)
* Where there is conflict, people come first.

### Electrical Noise

* Noise is bad...
* Radio Freq. Interference
* Generated by the components of an electrical system
  * Cables, Fluorescent lights
* Can cause damage to components
* Preventative measures
  * Power line conditioning
  * Proper grounding of systems
  * Shiedling
  * Limited exposure to and use of fluorescent lighting, heaters, magnets.


* Don't link buildings with copper cables.
  * Ground voltage differentials. -> Changes in "Ground" between buildings.
* Use fibre optics instead.

### Static and Humidity

* Ideal -> 40%-60%
* High humidity can cause corrosion of parts and components -> silver migration in particular (in solder)
* Low humidity allows for statc build-up
  * 4000V on hardwood floor
  * 20kV on a carpet
* Relative humidity can be controled with HVAC
* Preventative
  * Anti-static sprays and flooring
  * Rooms should be grounded including floors
  * Anti-static matting, and leashes
  * HVAC humidity control.

#### Numbers

* 40V -> damage transistors and sensitive equipment
* 1000V -> Corrupt CRT monitor
* 1500V -> Data loss on disk drive
* 2000V -> etc.

### Fire Detection and Suppression

* Successful suppression and detection of fire is essentially for continued operation, and staff safety.
  * Class A
  * Class B
  * Class C
  * Class D+E -> Chemical Fire


* A fire is a case of rapid oxidisation of a material
* A fire requires: Heat, Oxygen, Fuel
* How can we suppress fires?
  * Class A -> Water
    * Reduce the temperature
  * Class A+B -> Soda Acid
    * Suppress Fuel Supply
  * Class B+C -> CO2
    * Suppress oxygen
  * Class B+C -> Halon (and other gas suppressants)
    * Chemical reaction is used to supress fire, as well as replacing the oxygen.
* Use the right suppressant for the combustible.


* Heat-sensing
  * Based on either rate of change or a pre-determined temperature.
* Flame-actuated
  * Expensive, but accurate. Use a combination of Infra-red and ionisation sensors
* Smoke-actuted
  * Primarily used in ventilation systems, based of photoelectric systems
* Dial-up Alarm
  * When detection occurs an alarm can be sounded and emergency services summoned.

### Physical Security Controls

* Guards
  * Oldest form of security surveillance
  * Have the advantage of decision making
  * Best resource dealing with personnel
  * Disadvantages
    * Availability
    * Reliability
    * Training
    * Cost
* Dogs
  * Loyal and effective
* Fencing
  * Primary boundary access control
  * Can provide channeling of traffic
* Lighting
  * Common use
  * Increases visibility
  * Critical buildings -> "8' high with 2' candle power"
  * Sometimes area illuminated in Infra-red
* Locks
  * Ancient access control method
  * Preset Locks
    * Use a physical key
  * Programable locks
    * Use a key press sequence or push buttons and may be reprogrammed.
* CCTV
  * Detective Control, used to enhance guard ability.
  * Also used in investigation and prosecution.
* Access Cards
  * Contain ID and access info
  * Magstripe incorporate into photo ID
  * May be used as token for access control.
  * Wireless proximity readers
    * No physical contact needed
      * Passive devices
      * Field-powered
      * Transponders
  * Biometrics

### Intrusion Detection

* Perimeter Intrusion Detection
  * Photoelectric sensors
  * Dry Contact Switches / Metallic Tape
* Motion detection
  * Wave Patterns

### Computer inventory

* Computers must be protected.
  * What happens WHEN you lose a phone or laptop
* Cable locks
* Port Controls
* Switch Controls
* Peripheral Switch Controls
* Electronic Security Controls

### Media Disposal

* Magnetic media is persistent, and requires proper erasure
  * Clearing
    * Overwriting of data. Media intended to be reused in organisation
  * Purging
    * Degaussing and overwriting of media prior to removal from a secure environment.
  * Destruction

### Common Faults

* Deleting a file does not erase it, FAT entries are simply updated.
* Damaged / 'bad' sectors on disks will generally not be formatted.
* Overwriting files may not destroy everything due to slack space.
* Degaussing equipment or operator failure.
* Media not formatted sufficiently -> DoD recommends destructive formats for sensitive media.

## Summary

* Physical security is important as it usually provides the first line of defence in a layered protection strategy.
* Broad scope relating to protection of human and physical assets
* In any situation, people come first.
